we're actually giving the body rest
that's five times deeper than sleep and
that's not an insignificant point
because when you give your body the rest
that it needs it knows how to heal
itself and one of the things that it's
healing itself from is stress but if you
have a trauma story or some narrative
going on this brain machine is the thing
that's responsible for printing every
single cell in the body so if you
haven't healed that trauma on a
psychological level then you might print
the same
cells in the body
hey everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is emily fletcher she's a
former broadway actress turned author
and meditation expert who's written the
book stress less accomplish more she was
named one of the top 100 women in
wellness to watch and she's spoken on
meditation for performance at google
harvard business school viacom
wonderlust a-fest and more she's taught
well over 15 000 people how to meditate
and she's been endorsed by health and
wellness luminaries such as dr mark
hyman as well as leaders in the
scientific community like dr andrew
huberman professor of neurobiology at
stanford which by the way is one of the
things that i found most interesting is
there's something about your approach to
meditation that makes people like me who
otherwise get a little like heebie gb
over some of the language and stuff
you speak about it in a way that draws
people in and when i saw that you had
this neurobiologist from stanford who
was like i was beyond skeptical when i
first heard about emily and then almost
by accident he ended up listening to you
what do you think it is about your
approach to meditation maybe some of
your definitions around it that make it
so accessible to people who are
otherwise quite skeptical well i think
the technique itself is designed for
people like us it's designed for people
with busy minds and busy lives it's not
a monastic practice so what do you mean
by that well it's not made for monks and
so a lot of the mindfulness that's out
there a lot of the quote unquote
meditation apps are actually teaching
mindfulness which was originally
designed for monks and it's been sort of
watered down for a more mainstream
audience whereas what i teach at ziva
even though it's six thousand years old
it was originally designed to make you
better at life so i think one it works
and two i think the delivery i think
partly my broadway background i like to
make things entertaining i'm not super
into meditation as an identity i think
that it's interesting you know we
meditate to get good at life not to get
good at meditation and so for me it's
just a tool and so it's like here's the
science behind why stress is making us
stupid and here's the science behind why
meditation can make you better at life
and when you say better at life what do
you mean well i think that's different
for everybody do you want to be a better
mom do you want to be a better husband
do you want to be better at your job
better philanthropist
but when you're stressed you're wasting
your mental and physical energy so
you're not able to show up as the most
amazing version of you so if you're
committing to a daily discipline of
meditating then you basically have more
cylinders you have more mental and
physical energy to really do the things
that you want to do in your life
and for people that think that
meditation is not for them what is
meditation like at its most basic and
and i think that your differentiation of
um breaking out mindfulness and
meditation i think it's actually pretty
interesting and i'd never heard anyone
talk about that and i realized i was
confusing the two as well
so how do you separate those two and why
is separating them and understanding the
difference important so meditation
that's most basic definition is a stress
relieving tool
that's it it's a tool to help you get
rid of stress in your body so that you
can do what you want to do in your life
now where this gets a little tricky is
that most people are using the terms
mindfulness and meditation as synonyms
but they're not actually the same thing
i would define mindfulness as the art of
bringing your awareness into the present
moment
beautiful powerful necessary especially
in this day and age we've all become
bulimic of the brain and we're ingesting
technology all day every day so we could
practice mindfulness right now we could
take a mindful breath we could feel our
feet on the ground and that's where
everyone's like oh cooking is my
meditation or exercise is my meditation
because they're saying i get present i
get mindful when i do those things
but exercise is not the same thing as
the type of meditation that i teach at
ziva
because there we're actually giving the
body rest that's five times deeper than
sleep and that's not an insignificant
point because when you give your body
the rest that it needs it knows how to
heal itself and one of the things that
it's healing itself from is stress
interestingly not only the stress from
the now because that's what mindfulness
does the meditation is getting rid of
the stress from your past so
when you say that it's five times deeper
than sleep what do you mean by that well
i mean that your metabolic rate
decreases which simply means that your
breathing slows it doesn't make you gain
weight it just means your breathing
chills out a little bit
your heart rate slows and your body
temperature cools and so that happens
within 30 to 45 seconds of practicing
this technique it's a different type of
rest because when you're sleeping your
brain is chilling but your body's on
guard you know
we're actually sucking wind
preparing for that tiger attack so that
if a tiger were to come in we could
quickly launch into fight fight or
flight when we're meditating in this
style the opposite happens body is
getting this deep healing rest but brain
is on guard and so it's almost the
opposite of what everyone thinks of when
they think of meditation you're going to
hear everything it's almost like you
have spidey senses
you're hyper aware and alert about your
surroundings but it is that mental
alertness that allows your body to get
that deep healing rest and then you're
more awake on the other side
so
when we're
getting into that change so fast what is
it exactly that we're doing to pull out
of the and it's probably worth talking
about um the parasympathetic nervous
system versus the sympathetic
and what are we doing physiologically
that's moving us so rapidly from one to
the other
so in the ziva technique and what i
teach in the book then we teach the
three m so mindfulness which is kind of
like the runway it's something active
for you to do and i use a technique
called come to your senses which is
really simple but very powerful we're
basically utilizing all five of your
senses to bring yourself into the now
and i like it because it's active and
most of us most of my high performing
clients say it's very challenging for
them to go from running 90 miles an hour
to just that goodbye that deep healing
rest that happens when they're
meditating so we use that mindfulness as
like an appetizer so i start by having
people hear what they're hearing the
most prevalent and the most subtle and
then feel what you're feeling see what
you're seeing taste what you're tasting
smell what you're smelling and that does
two things one it
when you use your five senses it wakes
up your right brain which is in charge
of the right now and it gets people out
of this idea of distractions it's like
oh i can hear the buzzing of the camera
oh i can hear the sirens outside i can
hear my dog barking and instead of
thinking oh i'm a bad meditator because
i'm not deaf it's like no meditation's
not going to make you a deaf person your
eardrums are still going to work just
fine you're actually going to have
spidey senses you start to include
everything that's going on inside of the
experience which makes it much more
enjoyable because again it's designed to
be integrated into your life
and then we click into like the main
course which is the meditation and in
that we're utilizing a tool called a
mantra and that word gets a little
hijacked by the wellness industry um a
lot of people use the term mantra to
mean affirmation you know like i'm a
strong angry woman or i want a million
dollars and those are what i would call
affirmations the word mantra is a
sanskrit word man means mind and truth
means vehicle so the mantras that we're
using in the book and in the online
course and in person are to varying
degrees of efficacy or strength but all
of them act as mind anchors so they're
designed to de-excite the nervous system
and when you de-excite something you
create order when you create order in
your body that lifetime of accumulated
stresses that we all have in our
cellular memory can start to come up and
out and it is that purging that
catharsis of stress that's ultimately
ultimately ushering us into a higher
cognitive performance state
so let's talk about the notion of like
there's all this
sort of retained stress
you talk about it being in the cellular
memory so the first thing i was like is
all of our cells turn over every however
many years
so
what exactly
is retained and how exactly does
meditation as being different from
mindfulness allow us to
um
release
that
so just being a human being on the
planet earth right now your cells are
getting damaged right like uv radiation
from the sun free radicals microwaves
now the radiation of our cell phones
like all that is changing our dna our
chromosomes our cell our cellular
performance our mitochondria it's what's
impacting us and so when we go to sleep
at night it's almost like there's been a
bunch of potholes in the road in our
cells and then we sleep those potholes
get filled in it's like we repave the
road each night when we sleep and very
similarly in meditation because we're
giving our body this deep healing rest
it's like it's just smoothing out the
potholes in the road we're
letting everything heal in the way that
nature designed like i don't think that
nature intended for us to be sick tired
and stressed i think that nature wants
us to be happy and healthy and vibrant
but because our modern day lives are not
really acting in accordance with nature
we're not in the sunshine as much as we
should be our feet are not on the soil
as much as it should be we're not having
as much sex as we should be our food is
not really food anymore and so we're
doing a lot of things that are taking us
out of alignment with nature and so the
meditation i think is becoming real
almost medicinal and so we need this
deep healing rest to sort of combat our
modern day lives
okay so going back to um the
the sort of physical nature of what
we're doing so we're getting in a
mindful state it's bringing us into the
present what is happening to the body in
those moments because it's it's pretty
profound
so
in in the breath practices which i will
use breath work almost as a warm-up i'll
use i'll do something called balancing
breaths to kind of prime the brain and
body to surrender into the meditation
but when you're using breathing
techniques which are so so powerful
there is always something to come back
to and it's a little bit more effort and
it requires a little bit more discipline
it's a bit of a shorter leash which in
this style of meditation is a much
longer leash i like to call it the lazy
man's meditation because it's really it
feels almost like taking a nap sitting
up you're not controlling your mind
you're not concentrating you're not
efforting
it's almost a surrendering practice and
we westerners don't like that word
surrender i will give you that that was
another thing reading the book i was
like
in fact tell people what's the
difference between surrendering and
giving up well giving up is like you're
surrendering in defeat i quit i can't do
it versus surrendering to me means
surrendering at the feet surrendering at
the feet of nature it's trusting that
nature has more information than we do
it's trusting that maybe just maybe
there are forces at play that are bigger
than our left brain individuality and i
think when you start meditating you tap
into that right brain which i like in
the right brain to a wi-fi router to
where it's like the thing that allows
you to plug into collective intelligence
it's the thing that allows you to
download those creative ideas and you've
probably found this when you're
meditating you're just so much more
creative you're so much more in flow
state and that's happening because
you're quite literally taking that right
brain to the gym and then you start
firing on all cylinders in your waking
state um because we go back to your
original question about what's happening
physiologically and like where and why
is stress stored in for so long you're
right the body does regenerate
cellularly every seven years but if you
have a trauma story or some narrative
going on this brain machine is the thing
that's responsible for printing every
single cell in the body so if you
haven't healed that trauma on a
psychological level then you might print
the same
cells in the body so by the time the
average american is 20 years old we have
approximately 10 million premature
cognitive commitments which is this
background radiation that you're talking
about it's like these open windows on
your brain machine and most of us to
survive have had to minimize those right
so it's like they're all open but
they're minimized
but then when we start meditating it's
like we go in and we maximize those
windows so that we can click x and get
rid of them
so as far as the practice itself it's
it's very much about letting go it's
very much about letting go control
surrendering and
there's not too much for you to do and
and i know and honestly that's where my
job becomes a job because i live in new
york i teach busy new yorkers i teach
you know oscar tony emmy grammy award
winners like you know i'm teaching high
performing folks and they don't want to
let go they don't want to surrender
they're like i'm good thanks i'm gonna
i'm gonna keep my illusion of control
and so honestly my job becomes
giving people the tools and enough
intellectual knowledge that they trust
the process and that they feel safe
enough to let go it's interesting let's
talk about that it's one of those things
you hear all the time like to let go
or surrender to the process i'm open to
it but i don't fully understand it yeah
so it's not that i'm even resistant to
it it's that i don't get it enough to
like really do it
and in your book you talk you have a
case study
of a woman who was battling cancer and
she talked about surrendering to the
cancer
which of course in my sensibility i was
like what uh which she addresses but
walk walk us through how you can
that what you're actually doing to
surrender to something like your cancer
treatment yep so think about last night
when you went to bed
right you were like okay i'm going to
turn off the lights i'm going to put on
my pjs i'm going to get into bed and put
my phone on airplane and then you lay
down
and then you just
fall asleep
right like you're not doing anything
your body just slips into this other
state of consciousness starts running a
whole host of reparative functions and
then you wake up you're like oh i feel
great i feel fresh and clean and it's
bright and shiny versus how you felt at
11 o'clock at night after a full day's
work and so similarly when we do this
type of meditation you're not trying to
meditate right you're not like oh let me
be the best meditator in the land and
then you know through this process and
through these mantras it's like that
letting go that surrender happens and
and then what's cool is that when you
let go in the practice the brain starts
flooding you with dopamine and serotonin
which are bliss chemicals so it feels
nice when you're doing it so you start
to trust this process of surrender and
then the beautiful byproduct of that is
that that starts to bleed into your
waking state so because you're not so
terrified of letting go because you've
been doing it every day twice a day you
start to be like oh maybe i can just
ride this wave of life and so kathy is
the woman's name who's doing the
meditation through her cancer treatment
and she said you know i didn't fight my
cancer i experienced my cancer
and and i think that's a really powerful
shift because anything we push against
it's gonna push back with equal and
opposite force right like what we resist
persists and so instead of going in and
fighting cancer
she was healing and she was experiencing
it when she was in pain she was in pain
and and when she would meditate it would
allow her body to run these reparative
functions so that her she still did a
full you know western medical treatment
but her ability to recover from those
treatments was so much faster actually
her partner went to her doctor and said
hey i don't know that the chemo is
working because she seems really happy
and she seems present and she seems kind
of healthy like are you sure that chemo
is working and the doctor looks at her
partner and said she's bald chemo's
working whatever she's doing is helping
her to manage the intensity of these
treatments
most of us have been living our lives in
a little bit of an out of balance over
developed left brain individuality if i
don't do it no one will no good deed
goes unpunished and we've just been
letting the right brain atrophy and so
once you start taking that right brain
to the gym through the meditation
just everything gets a little bit easier
so you don't have to work so hard you
said that you will ask people hey who in
this audience has ever meditated
virtually every hand goes up and then
you ask and how many people do it every
week and 90 of the hands go down so what
is it that that breaks that why do
people struggle yeah two things one
people think they're too busy to
meditate
and two they think that the point is to
clear the mind those are the two huge
barriers for folks if you're too busy to
meditate that just means that you're
prioritizing things that make you money
over things that make you happy and so
it's like okay well what if there was a
tool that could actually make you more
money and have better sex oh yeah and
you're going to be a nicer person and
enjoy your life a lot more
everyone would say yes to that like when
you frame it like are you willing to
invest two percent of your day to make
the other 98 more amazing the answer is
of course
where i think that people have a block
is that a lot of people have been doing
like a free mindfulness app that they
downloaded did it for four or five days
didn't really see a return on their time
investment right because our time is our
most valuable resource you know this
better than anyone and so it's like if
i'm going to invest 10 minutes of my
time i better be getting a return on
that investment and if people like us
with busy minds and busy lives are doing
a monastic type of meditation they might
not be getting the type of return that
they need it's not necessarily making
them better with their kids or more
productive at work or more creative and
so it just feels like a cute pedicure
for your brain you're like nobody well
maybe when i get a little bit more free
time i'll do that time wasting thing um
and so i'm that's why i really wanted to
break down the roi of like okay for 15
minutes twice a day you're gonna get
this many hours back of productivity
you're gonna get this much deeper sleep
you're gonna have this much more
creativity and obviously it's different
for everyone but i've seen some patterns
unfold
and the second barrier to entry is this
idea that people have to clear their
mind yes you may access different states
of consciousness you may find yourself
in you know moments of thought freeness
but it's not the point and if you go in
with an agenda of trying to clear your
mind then you're going to use effort and
if you use effort in this type of
meditation you mess the whole thing up
it's like you turn that mantra into a
propeller when it wants to be an anchor
that's really interesting so
here you are you're
not having fun anymore on broadway
you're stressing out you're going gray
early you're like i've gotta do
something different so what was that
journey like and where did you struggle
so
i'd say my big struggle was uh
it's just the fact that being on
broadway wasn't the dream that i wanted
it to be because i was very very deep in
the i'll be happy when syndrome you know
once i get on broadway i will be happy
once i get this boyfriend or this agent
or this zero in my bank account and i
think that's ultimately what led to
looking internally because and i i'm
thankful
that i achieved the dream early enough
that i realized that that wasn't the pot
of gold that i was waiting for and then
when i learned meditation it there was
no struggle it was just like this is
amazing why does everyone not do this
and that's why i went so deep down the
rabbit hole so quickly when i did my
teacher training when i was meditating
like 18 hours a week
transcribing books by hand in sanskrit
and apprenticing
i the thing that came up for me was very
much the loss of my identity of being an
actor this is what i had done since i
was in fourth grade and it was such a
big part of singing and dancing and
acting and it was so identified with it
that moving into becoming a meditation
teacher there was a mourning process
that happened so
as you're going through the meditation
part i i keep coming back to
breathe through your diaphragm like do a
belly breath and so whenever i'm trying
to get somebody new who's never
meditated before i come back to add a
very similar experience to you at least
by way of explanation in that it was
instant for me
once i took my very first diaphragm
breath my life changed forever
because i was like whoa that's so weird
like it pulled because i've struggled
with anxiety massively and that was
originally what led me to
doing this and now i push back on
meditation for a long time because it
felt very
forgive me but it felt very feminine and
my thing was like i grew up a little too
in touch with my feminine side and so as
an entrepreneur what i had to learn was
to toughen up
and so i thought um meditation like
that's pushing me in the wrong direction
and i finally met a navy seal mark
devine who you may or may not know and
he said dude stop being an [__] will
you meditate
and i was like all right this guy's
about as tough as they come i'm gonna
give it a shot and so he has this thing
he calls um box breathing yep and i
tried it and it made me feel out of
breath and i was like this is so weird
but that very first time that i breathed
for my diaphragm it felt right so i was
like there's something here to chase
and so i kept playing with the the
breath of what part i held what was long
what was short until
i could optimize the pleasure of each
part of the breath cycle and once i
started focusing on that
then it was like okay this is amazing
and then i started listening to the
sounds of nature and there was something
about the sound of nature that
effortlessly got me into the moment
because i would just hear the sound
that's all i had to do and so i was like
hyper present because i was actually
hearing the birds or the waves or the
thunder or whatever
and so that anchored me every time my
monkey mind is going crazy i would just
say return to the breath
and so i just kept telling people
there's a physiological thing here that
you can do yeah so what do you tell
people to do when the monkey mind is
going crazy is it say one is it like
focus on the now like what how do you
help them get through that so that
they'll stick with it yeah so the monkey
mind is basically that it's that
background radiation it's all those open
windows it's those premature cognitive
commitments which is happening every
single time you've ever launched into
fight or flight your body's left a
little open window on your brain machine
and so then the world becomes a landmine
field where you're just like trigger
trigger trigger the smell of my
ex-boyfriend's cologne adele was the
song that was playing when we broke up
the taste of strawberries makes me think
of that time i almost got in a car
accident and i was eating strawberry so
it's just that's that's what that
buildup of anxiety happens over time and
so because i teach people how to do this
stuff on their own and i give people a
practice that's every single day twice a
day it's like you're clearing out all
those landmines and you would start with
the mindfulness then you would move into
the meditation and you would you would
pick up the word but then it's if at any
point it slips away you let it slip away
so it's almost like the mantra or the
word becomes a forgetting device it's
and this sounds a little crazy but it's
designed to be forgotten right so it's
like you put the key in the car and you
have to have the right key for the right
car that's important otherwise you're
just sitting still in your driveway you
put it in you learn how to turn it on
but then you let go of the key you don't
just sit there grinding the key in the
ignition
right um but i think a lot of people
think like oh well it's the mantra so
much
mantra and they're trying to do
meditation the way they do mindfulness
of come back come back come back come
back and so this is why i'm such a
stickler on the on the words because i
think as these practices are becoming
more and more popular we have to get
specific with our vernacular so
mindfulness is amazing but it's more
discipline it's more focused meditation
is more about letting go so yes you pick
up this word but then you're going to
find that it
it's custom designed to
de-excite and to help us to access more
subtle states of consciousness and
it's almost like you're walking into
sleep and i know i keep coming back to
the when you went to sleep last night
there was nothing that you did right you
just laid down and your body slept all
on its own once you get the right key in
the right car you get the driving
instructions your body will fall into
this meditation suite state quite
innocently and spontaneously
what is some of the research showing
like what are the the end states of
meditation
well
one cool thing that happens is that it
thickens your corpus callosum which is
the thin white strip that connects the
right and left hemispheres of the brain
and that's important because most of us
have been hanging out in our left brains
for our whole lives all we have access
to is our waking state
and then in this meditation thing we're
accessing the right brain and in what's
interesting also to go back to this
mindfulness meditation piece is
mindfulness where you're directing your
focus where you're maybe coming back to
the breath a small part of the brain
lights up but very very bright which is
in different than in this style of
meditation the whole brain lights up but
not as bright and so it is it's like
creating neuroplasticity and creating
neurogenesis and the whole brain is
lighting up so it's strengthening that
corpus callosum now why would you want a
fat corpus callosum well everyone should
because it's quite literally the bridge
between the critical mind and the
creative mind and so my theory here is
that the stronger your corpus callosum
is the easier it is for you to come up
with creative problem solving ideas when
it counts and your boss yells at you
instead of shutting down and going blank
you can come up with the idea or if you
get into a fight with your partner and
then it gets really heated and then you
like shut down and retreat to the
bedroom and then a couple of hours later
you start coming up with all these witty
comebacks and you're like why couldn't i
have thought of that in the moment well
my theory is that the thicker your
corpus callosum is the easier it is for
you to really be firing on all cylinders
because no one cares how creative your
ideas are in the shower right they care
how creative your ideas are when you're
giving the the presentation to the board
when you're teaching in front of your
students when you're on the field of
play whatever your field of play is
um some of the other things is that it
can reverse your body age by somewhere
between 8 and 15 years
which is nuts and i did that when i
first started learning about this i was
like no way this is not like a fountain
of youth it's not a magic pill but
here's the reality stress is prematurely
aging us and if you want proof of that
look at any president the day they take
office and that same president four
years later it's like they have the
weight of the world in their shoulders
and that takes a toll on the body and we
know how we look if we're not sleeping
and drinking and stress it's like
versus how you look when you're on
vacation you're like oh i look great and
so meditation is like taking a vacation
in your brain every day twice a day and
and what's happening is that it's
strengthening your telomeres which is
like little casings at the end of your
dna in your chromosomes and if those
weaken and shorten then your dna can
unravel faster it's like you know the
little caps at the end of your shoelaces
um i don't have a ton of science on this
but anecdotally it seems to improve
fertility
there's a lot of case studies in the
book about people who've gotten pregnant
i got pregnant on my first try at 39. i
have students at 44 who had the
fertility markers of 18 year olds after
meditating for two years who previously
were not even candidates for ivf um that
was actually one thing really
interesting in the book you showed some
case studies of like blood and hormone
levels so that was really really
interesting what should people be
tracking like what are some things that
um are signs that you might be having a
problem and then what are some things
that they should look for
that show that well this is really
working well i recommend that everybody
check their just their own relationship
with stress so in the in chapter one i
even say like pull out a piece of paper
let's go like how's your sleep how's
your stress how's your anxiety how's
your road rage how's your acid reflux
how's your how do you respond to high
demand situations do you bite your nails
how much money are you spending on
therapy coffee alcohol retail therapy
anonymous sex um you know
antidepressants anti-anxiety and i'll
give you a cliff's nose the average
american is spending 11 800 on that
stuff per year
and it's treating the symptoms not the
cause
and when you go in and do the meditation
it's like you learn it one time and then
you have this tool to take with you for
life and you're actually treating the
root cause you're actually saving
yourself money and all this stuff that
we've been kind of looking for the
answer but i recommend the big ones are
sleep right so how's your sleep i think
is that an aura ring that you're wearing
yeah so i've been working with them and
so we've been talking about how to like
really incorporate a meditation
interface into the ring because right
now most body data monitoring devices
think that meditation is sleep and i
think that we're nearing the the phase
where we'll be technologically advanced
enough for them to know the difference
that would also be really extraordinary
to see to to gamify and to see like whoa
i'm actually really getting a result
here what metric do you think we should
be paying attention to with that is it
going to be heart rate variability i
don't know if that's impacted or not but
what do you think we can actually track
with that well sleep is a big one um you
know i had insomnia this thing cured my
insomnia on the first day i'd say that
anecdotally that's probably the number
one benefit that people report is that
their sleep just gets so much deeper
more refreshing they need less of it
over time usually in the first few weeks
they need more of it because most people
are working out of a sleep debt so
they're just like exhausted they're like
i'm like you promise me more energy i'm
so tired and they get mad at me for a
little while but then after if you keep
you know meditating then your sleep most
people's sleeping signatures look like
this they go light medium deep wake up
light medium deep wake up light medium
deep wake up that lasts for eight or
nine hours they wake up in the morning
they're exhausted versus once you start
meditating most people's sleep goes
light medium deep for six hours medium
light wake up and so you've shaved
potentially a few hours off of the sleep
that you need at night but you're waking
up feeling more refreshed and rested so
if we go back to the original point of
uh pain which is i'm too busy to
meditate
well if all meditation does for you is
shave one hour off the sleep you need at
night then for a 30 minute time
investment you already have 30 extra
minutes in your day and that's to say
nothing of an increase in productivity
and creativity and clarity um so i would
say track your sleep depth length that
you need how do you feel in the morning
based on the amount of hours of sleep
that you got
and then
biting your nails panic attacks anxiety
attacks how many times a year do you get
sick how do you feel like you are
performing in high demand situations uh
and some of it you know a lot of people
like how do i know if it's working emily
i'm like your life will get better
and and i don't i personally don't need
a body data monitoring device to tell me
that my life is getting better like i
just know
um now that said i think for the
skeptics and the pragmatists in the
beginning it's very helpful to have
tools like this so we can chart yeah
yeah for me that would be really cool
see in real time if you know you're
getting into that zone or not and i went
through a really
weird back injury where um
i was actually experiencing in my neck
so you have these things called scalenes
that are like basically right by your
clavicle and they had gotten so tight i
couldn't stand comfortably i couldn't
sit comfortably
everything was a nightmare i finally
understood what people mean when they
said
if i could just cry i would feel better
and it was so frustrating i was like if
i could just cry i would feel better
like this is so miserable
and i ended up having to do biofeedback
because the part of me that was the
problem was actually my lower mid back
which i never would have guessed it
seemed impossible that that was
affecting something up by my neck
but the physiotherapist was like trust
me i've seen this before this is the
problem and so as i was learning to fire
that muscle
i was shocked at how at first i couldn't
even imagine what he was talking about
then he put the biofeedback device and
then i could
target it and i could get into that zone
so when you talk about sort of slipping
through that bliss state it's like
i'm sure some people will struggle with
that and they're not sure like is that
what you're talking about did i do it
and and that's the question i've gotten
a lot around meditation i'm sure you
have as well like how do i know that
it's working and you said your life will
get better but there there might be that
intermediate way to really show people
like okay this is the biometric
signature of what we're looking for boom
you're in it that would be really really
interesting well i think it does exist
you know
muse like the headband it's very much
designed for mindfulness so i say if
people are going to practice what i
teach in the book or a ziva i say you
can use it you just have to turn the
sound off because that is very it's
almost like slapping you on the hand for
having thoughts which is the opposite of
what i teach i say that thoughts are not
the enemy you're allowed to have
thoughts the mind is going to think and
so many people report that that one
piece of information that thoughts are
not the enemy of meditation effort is
allows them to feel so liberated you're
gonna have mental field trips and just
like when you sit down to meditate or do
breathing probably some random thoughts
you know pop into your mind okay cool so
when those thoughts come back it's like
you
you're going to innocently and
spontaneously realize that you're off of
the practice and when that realization
comes up innocently and spontaneously
that's your cue to gently come back it's
just it's a similar process just a much
longer leash
yeah i actually really like the way that
you talk about the mantra in the book um
you said you're not going to like sort
of consciously say it you're going to
let it bubble up from within and i want
you to think of it like the very
attractive person at the bar you don't
run up and start talking to them a mile
a minute you'd be a little coy and you
know you let it happen and i thought
okay that actually makes a lot of sense
yeah and so that whole effortless thing
is is really starting to come together
for me i like the repetition of this is
the lazy man's version and in the book
oh god i wish i could remember the exact
words you used but you translate i think
a sanskrit word that means like
yoga which means
union attained by action hardly taken
so yoga means union what are we unioning
we're unioning individuality with
totality karma means action and nishkama
means hardly taken right so we're not in
there like ah gotta meditate i gotta get
there
so it is a decidedly more feminine
approach it's not so masculine it's much
more surrendered it's much more
receiving um so nishkama karma yoga
union attained by action hardly taken
and this is where it's hard for us
westerners and certainly high achieving
westerners you know we like to work hard
and play hard so the idea of just
sitting down and letting some other tool
kind of do the work for us feels very
foreign but if you look at real high
performers right
they're not doing all the work
themselves they learn how to delegate
they learn how to let other people take
the reins at some point and i find that
with this practice it's almost like you
allow nature to take the reigns from
time to time
um what do you mean by that what am i
receiving and what's the role of nature
well
this might play a little bit into the
third m of the technique which is the
manifesting which is basically like
you're setting your intention right of
what you want to have happen and then
it's
it's allowing
nature to do what nature is designed to
do instead of thinking that we have to
do everything on our own
um and so you're receiving you're
receiving
abundance joy
uh
creativity ideas um whatever nature
really has in store but it's not it's
not a one-way conversation in either
direction we don't get to state
everything we want and it happens
exactly the when and how that we want it
and neither is it fatalism it's not like
well i'll just let nature take the reins
and whatever whenever it's a two-way
conversation we have 50 left brain
individuality with 50 right totality and
so to me it's always about finding that
balance of like yes this is what i want
and oh it seems like nature has other
things in store so instead of just
fighting it tooth and nail let me see if
i can dance this dance a little bit it's
really interesting you said in the book
that
exactly what you just said there and it
hit me in the book when you said it and
it hit me now when you just said it i
don't think that nature would give us 50
right and 50 left if we're meant to use
them in 90 10 split
thought wow that's actually really
interesting do you know who kim peak is
so i've ah this story is so interesting
to me so kim peek is the guy that rain
man was based on in real life um
a true savant
and he obviously had
wildly challenging developmental issues
but he had no corpus callosum and so he
could memorize
memorize
two books
simultaneously one with his left eye one
with his right eye it's crazy and so you
begin to understand that part of what
the corpus callosum is doing is allowing
in inhibitory impulses from the other
side so there's like this shutting down
of a part and
the what they're doing with um
the magnetic i'm forgetting now the word
for electromagnetic stimulation it's
where they put basically a big magnet up
to a part of your brain and they can
shut it down and by turning off a part
like they took people and they said draw
a jaguar whatever and people would draw
it and then they would hit them with
this magnet and then they would have
them draw it again and they could draw
better because they're turning off a
region of the brain which actually stops
people from being able to interpret what
they're seeing in their head and
actually draw it out now what the
advantage to having that stopped is i'm
not entirely sure but the fact that it's
a turning off of something that allows
you to be better at something i think is
really interesting so that whole notion
of you talking about getting the
the brain working all at once across
both sides is very fascinating because
it's so different and the way that i've
always thought about meditation is that
it takes me to a place that is calm and
creative so
i feel relaxed i feel at ease to your
point about surrendering and letting go
and not trying to muscle my way through
it um and then the more far-flung
regions of my brain are able to
connect which is really really
interesting so when i first started
experiencing anxiety
the the analogy that was so perfect was
when i'm not anxious i feel like i have
a superpower yes and then when i'm
anxious it's like kryptonite and and it
is all gone and it is so weird to think
that that's just me worrying about the
outcome that the very fact that i'm
worried that something will go wrong
that i will [__] up that i won't be
perfect that
people's perception of me will change
all of that like
it actually made me worse like
in a very real way where you could see
it and test it and i remember thinking
i i know what's happening to my brain
the blood is actually leaving my
prefrontal cortex it's going into the
areas for fight or flight and
it actually is making me dumber and you
talk about this that
being stressed is quite literally making
you dumber
and being able to get out from under
that through meditation is
super powerful
so
what is your hope what do you hope that
people will
get from the book and if you can tie
that into the manifestation and how
people can
build a life that is closer to what they
want for themselves
well my hope for the book is that it
inspires people to actually meditate
because at this point the science is in
there's thousands of peer-reviewed
scientific studies we know it's good for
us everyone knows they should be
meditating not that many people are
actually meditating and i mean like
let's go home for thanksgiving dinner
and everyone meditates together before
we have the meal meditating i mean
christmas morning before we open our
presents we meditate as a family
together i mean just think how much more
fun slash tolerable
you know holidays would be if everyone
wasn't so triggered and so in their
anxiety and in their past and future
um and so that's i really wanted the
book to be a bit of a trojan horse it's
like
you know let's take the very powerful
medicine that is meditation and let's
wrap it in the candy coating of hey it's
gonna help you make more money it's
gonna help you have better sex it's
gonna reverse your body age you're not
gonna get sick as often so why would you
not do this it can feel quite selfish to
take this time for yourself if you have
kids or a partner or a job it's easy to
get into that martyrdom story of
everyone else needs me so i can't afford
to take care of myself but your family
doesn't want you stressed your husband
doesn't want you stressed your
co-workers don't want you stupid they
want you present they want you creative
they want you happy they want you
innovative and so we need that blood
that's all being run to the amygdala to
the fight or flight center we need that
blood and disperse to our whole brain
and i think big picture it's like yes
selfishly we want to make ourselves
better but also as a species we're being
faced with some pretty big challenges
and it really will be up to this
generation and the next generation to
decide whether or not we you know turn
this bus around or drive it off the
cliff
and so i think that we want to be firing
on all cylinders so that we can really
step up to these big challenges that we
are being called to answer
what do you think some of those big
challenges are that we're facing well
that are unique to know well climate
change is the big one for me let's let's
innovate around it this is an
opportunity i think for huge business
opportunities um because there's big
problems to solve uh racism which is any
like terrorism anytime we see other
people as separate from ourselves i
think another one is the fact that our
food is not food anymore the fact that
we just have so many people on the
planet that we're depleting the soil
that our food has changed we're
genetically modifying our food i think
that's impacting our you know our gut
chemistry which is impacting our brain
chemistry so i think that these are the
big three for me
what do you think about social media
i think that it's a really powerful tool
and i think that you can use that tool
for good or for
evil
and i think that it's it's just any
other drug you know you could have a
glass of wine and it could really
enhance a dinner you'd also drink a
bottle of vodka and you know cry
yourself to sleep in a bathtub you know
like it's they're all tools
um and so for me social media i just
went through a very challenging
postpartum period and my pregnancy was a
breeze but my postpartum was brutal and
i remember posting about it on instagram
and i was like okay like i need help
like i am in pain i'm in physical pain
emotional pain i don't i had no idea
that this was going to be so hard and
they were sharing their tools and their
tips and their tricks and just making me
feel less alone and in that moment i was
like wow this really can be a beautiful
thing so i'm very grateful that it
exists but i think that we have to be
careful and know that it's a powerful
tool yeah my thing with social media
i've been thinking about this a lot
lately we just had cal newport on the
show who wrote a book called digital
minimalism
and
i have to say cal
more than a lot of people has really
made me rethink things that i have sort
of long held cherished beliefs about i
had like this real uh epiphany
here at the company which is that i'm
not being productive enough and it's
like your analogy of all those windows
being open they're minimized but they're
open i think that's so powerful and it
was the way that you said that they're
minimized that made me think yeah that
is exactly what's happening like
i'm not sort of consciously aware that
they're open but when i think about all
the little things dripping on my mind
just pulling it just enough attention
and it
i think social media is super powerful
um i think that it's a total game
changer it certainly changed my life and
i've seen it impact a lot of people
super positively but
not understanding how to like give it a
time and a space
i think is where certainly where i was
going wrong and the fact that i would
check my phone in fact harpreet was
talking about this he said that the
average person touches their phone um
150 times a day which is once every six
minutes and it's like if you're just
just hearing that like once every six
minutes that you're doing something
anything it you're just breaking the
cycle you're never able to do that deep
work you're never able to really like go
into something and that was
that is precisely why i think that your
book is so important that meditation is
so critical that people learn how to do
this is it creates that space for people
to go deep it it starts closing those
windows and i think maybe one of the
most important things it gives people a
trained ability to oh i'm in the
sympathetic nervous system i'm going to
now rapidly get into the parasympathetic
do you take cold showers
i do like a 45 second at the end hey
we'll count it that's fantastic
so the interesting thing to me about
cold showers is
that it creates this massive sense of
urgency like my body is like get the
[__] out of the cold water it is like
screaming it no matter how many times i
do it i have that same sense of urgency
oh thanks for saying that because i keep
thinking it's going to get easier but
it's not it has not for me okay and but
what has gotten easier is because i
meditate i'm like oh i know how to stop
this i can immediately downshift the
letting go that you talk about i can
um i haven't yet used a mantra trust me
after reading your book i will be trying
it and this has actually been super
helpful for me i think even more than
just the book now i get the like letting
go the jazz of it all um so it'll be fun
to experiment with that yeah but being
in the shower that sense of urgency it's
immediate and i can diaphragm breathe
and what what i think of is just you're
letting go at a physical level so i'm
relaxing on my muscles i'm doing i'm
sort of thinking lazy i'm channeling
lazy you know like they're relaxed and
it's so weird that in in the midst of
that urgency where my body is telling me
you're about to die bruh it's like you
can still just let it go and be chill so
having people be able to do that whether
they're doing it just meditation or
meditation mixed with a cold shower or
something else to give them that ability
to practice over and over and over
the letting go and just like even now
talking about i can feel myself like
chilling out
super interesting i think that this cold
shower is like a mini vipassana retreat
have you ever done vipassana no like
it's a 10 day silent meditation retreat
you're sitting for 10 hours a day it is
intense and you're in extreme physical
pain it is not what i teach at all in
the book it's very monastic it's very
disciplined it's very focused but it was
the most intense pain i've ever been in
like for the first 45 minutes you're
like i'm great i'm awesome at this and
then minute 46 you're like certainly
i'll have to amputate my legs certainly
i'll never walk again and i was like oh
i might have to go back to broadway i
might be a dancer again let me get all
these pillows and i had like four
cushions and finally the teacher calls
me over and he's not supposed to be
talking either by like day four i was
like princess and the p and he goes
stop trying to not be miserable
and i was like
oh
i got it
and so it was it's that it's that it's a
trying to not be miserable it's that i'm
in the shower my body's freaking out let
me fix it if you can remind yourself i'm
not in physical danger if you have the
ability to stop avoiding pain and
chasing pleasure
if you can master that you can master
almost anything in your life
that was super powerful
i want to talk a little bit more about
the you shifting your identity and that
you had that moment of mourning i think
that's really interesting
um what do you tell people about that
like if they bring up a similar issue
that they're going through
well i know that for me it was it was a
it was a form of unstressing it was all
my minimized windows getting maximized
and it was like a an intense physical
and emotional detox and it happened that
happened to be the story that it
attached itself to of like you're
letting go of this lifetime of an acting
career um and it was sad but for for
people when they start meditating their
identity does change a little bit
because it's shocking how many people
are very attached to their anxiety
actually like i just am anxious i just
have daddy issues i just have abandoned
issues that's just who i am like that's
not who you are you're 24-hour day bliss
that's your birthright everything else
is stress and so when you start shedding
that stuff you have to realize that wait
i'm actually god pretending to be human
and that's an identity shift like that's
uh what's that ram dodge ram dos quote
treat every human as if they're god in
drag which i love so much but and if
that sounds sort of esoteric and
religious just because i'm using the g
word but i would define god as the
collective intelligence of all that is
the collective consciousness of all that
is and when you start tapping into your
right brain every day you're no longer
emily fletcher a 39 year old redheaded
meditation teacher sitting in a set in
l.a you just are
and it's like you practice these little
mini transcendences these little mini
deaths every day so that when you walk
up to the big transition the big you
know inevitable that we're all racing
towards which is death it becomes a
little less terrifying and so i think if
you're if you're looking on that scale
of identity shift then you being from
like going from an anxious person to a
chill person is not that uh terrifying
yes self narrative is
super powerful what do you talk to
people at all about that is that part of
what you helped them with so i don't
help people with their self talk so much
except for the manifesting piece which
is really just giving people the tools
to ask better questions because you ask
terrible questions you're gonna get
terrible answers and most of us are
thinking that we're manifesting or
praying when we're asking questions like
why did she get a job and i didn't when
am i going to lose this weight when am i
going to get a boyfriend and we're just
complaining really instead of asking
questions like how much money do i want
to make what's my dream relationship
look like what's my relationship with my
body feel like
and so when we start asking better
questions we get better answers and so
it's not necessarily the 24-hour day
self-talk it's just utilizing that
sacred time at the end of the meditation
to
start planting these seeds for what you
want your life to look like realizing
how much agency we actually have over
our lives which is terrifying for some
people because it's easier to play a
victim and say well life's hard and
these things have happened to me and if
you don't have food and water and you're
in an unsafe environment then you have
to be in fight or flight and it's much
harder to manifest when you're in that
state but you might need to be for
survival so i recognize that it is a
luxury but those of us that have it that
are privileged enough to be able to find
access to these tools i think that yes
selfishly we need to improve our own
lives so that we can help to lift up the
people around us yeah and i like that
you've talked about how
manifesting isn't just magic thinking
like you still have to go take
action to you know make it come true
and
do you worry at all about people um
like getting into that sort of
aggressive push push push mentality when
it comes to taking the action
mostly myself
[Laughter]
i like for this book for example like i
really wanted to be a new york times
bestseller and my team and i we had like
great ambitions and a strategy and you
know and i was manifesting about it and
you know our numbers were amazing like
by numbers we should have hit the times
list and then we didn't and so i had to
be like okay well now what you know like
so did i fail did like my manifesting
not work am i gonna be sad about it and
then or do you realize that it's never
about the goal
it's never about the thing that you
think is going to deliver the happiness
it's always about what you accomplish on
the way
and the feeling that you think that goal
will bring you
right and so now that we're on the other
side of this book lunch and looking at
all the lives that we've touched and all
the people that have written me on
social media and said hey i meditated
for the first time my anxiety's gone hey
i haven't had a panic attack my sleep is
better i feel more energized than i have
in years that's ultimately why i wrote
the book it wasn't to make the new york
times right but it's a it's a motivating
force because we humans are funny and we
like to our egos like to prove how good
we are but it's never about that right
it's always about who we're going to
impact on the way yeah i love that
where can people find you online
so ziva ziva meditation.com
is where our in-person classes our
online classes live
the book is basically anywhere books are
sold you can get amazon barnes and noble
books a million um and then we're all
over social media just at ziva
meditation
all right
if people could make only one change to
have the biggest impact on their life
what change do you think they should
make well this feels like a trick
question for me because mine is no
question meditation if we if we took
that off the table okay second answer
um
it's so obvious but often the most
profound truths are the simplest it's
exercise
if you're meditating twice a day and
exercising every day your life is going
to be amazing just full stop um and
all the challenges that we face we're so
much better equipped to adapt to those
challenges if we're exercising our
brains and our bodies i like that a lot
all right guys meditation i'm telling
you it will change your life if you let
it it may not hit you right away but if
you keep at it i'm telling you there's
something there for everyone i don't
think there's anyone that shouldn't do
it if you haven't already speaking of
things that you should do if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care thank you so much thank you that
was amazing much for watching and being
a part of this community if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe you're
going to get weekly videos on building a
growth mindset cultivating grit and
unlocking your full potential